"force organizations" guide suggestions (#598)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/guides/force-organizations.mdx

};

```

> #### Set an active organization based on the URL

Reviewer: This is a great section @panteliselef and the code example is solid. However there is nothing instructing the developer on how to use this component or where it should be mounted.

I think this should be present as an alternative to CustomOrgSwitcher. Show how to mount this in 'pp/(with-active-organization)/layout.tsx' and explain its tole versus a component to let the user select an org. That, or cover its use in some way.

Author: I forgot to mention this as a comment last night when I posted this PR! Thank you Roy. And I am giving this a +1 that we should show where this `SyncActiveOrganization` component can be used/mounted.

  return null
}
```

### Limit access to users with active organizations only

Now that you have hidden personal accounts from the UI and can detect and set an active organization, you can limit access to users with active organizations only.

It's possible for a user to be logged in, but not have an active organization. This can happen in two cases:
  - The user created an account and hasn't created an organization yet
  - The user joined or created multiple organizations, and left or deleted the active organization

Based on your use case, you can decide to limit users either in the entire app or a specific part of it. For example, a B2B application might need to limit access to only users with an active organization, whereas a B2B2C application might limit only the `/dashboard` path to users with an active organization.

#### Limit the entire application to only users with active organizations

In Next.js App Router applications, you can use a [layout](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/pages-and-layouts#layouts) to limit the entire application to only users with active organizations.

> In the example below, a component called `RequiredActiveOrgLayout` is created. This component will be used as a layout for all pages that require an active organization. If the user has an active organization, the children will be rendered. If the user does not have an active organization, the organization selection page will be rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, a component called `RequiredActiveOrgLayout` is created. This component will be used as a layout for all pages. If the user has an active organization, the route the user is visting will be rendered. If the user does not have an active organization, the organization selection page will be rendered.
```

> ```tsx filename="app/(with-active-organization)/layout.tsx"

Reviewer: As this section is for 'the whole application' this should probably be modified to be in the root layout. That or something more like "app/(application)/layout.tsx"

Also see comment below.

  import { OrganizationList } from "@clerk/nextjs"
  import { auth } from "@clerk/nextjs/server"
  import { PropsWithChildren } from "react"

  export default function RequiredActiveOrgLayout(props: PropsWithChildren) {
    // Get the organization ID from the session
    const { orgId } = auth()

    // If the user has an active organization, render the children
    if (orgId) {
      return props.children
    }

    // If the user does not have an active organization, render the organization selection page
    return (
      <section>
        <h1>Welcome to the Organization Selection page.</h1>
        <p>
          This part of the application requires the user to select an
          organization in order to proceed. If you are not part of an
          organization, you can accept an invitation or create your own
          organization.
        </p>
        <OrganizationList hidePersonal={true} />
      </section>
    )
  }
```

> In Next.js Pages Router applications, Clerk's [`authMiddleware`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware) helper can be used to limit the entire application to only user's with an active organization.

Reviewer: `authMiddleware` can play the same role for App and Pages Router. Its agnostic in that sense. We should either do App Router as the only option (especially as near the top the guide says "This guide will be written for Next.js applications using App Router"), or provide App and Pages Router examples for /org-selection

@panteliselef -- I would contend this should all be switched to `clerkMiddleware` and we merge this next week when v5 releases. Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: There are a lot of combos that can be used. The reasoning behind not having an snipper with middleware for App Router is that I see people wanted to do "page" or "layout" protection. For sure going with a middleware will be more performant. 

In a slack thread we discussed that we wanted to showcase a layout protection for app router and authMiddleware for pages router.

Regarding `clerkMiddleware` we can come back an update the guide

Author: I also thought about this and believe that because it can be used in both router-types, that we should showcase both. So we can change the text to be something like this:

```suggestion
Clerk's [`authMiddleware`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware) helper can be used to limit the entire application to only user's with an active organization. It can be used in both App Router and Pages Router applications.

... (show both App Router and Pages Router examples)

In Next.js App Router applications, instead of using `authMiddleware`, you also have the option to use a [layout](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/pages-and-layouts#layouts) to limit the entire application to only users with active organizations.
```

Author: @panteliselef would you be able to throw together the App Router example for using `authMiddleware` ?

Reviewer: This feels good to me.

          const searchParams = new URLSearchParams({
            redirectUrl: req.url
          })

          const orgSelection = new URL(`/org-selection?${searchParams.toString()}`, req.url);

          return NextResponse.redirect(orgSelection)
        }
        ...
      }
    });
    ```
  </Tab>

  <Tab>
    ```tsx filename="pages/org-selection.tsx"
    import { OrganizationList } from "@clerk/nextjs"
    import { useRouter } from "next/router";

    export default function OrganizationSelection() {
      const { query } = useRouter();

      return (
        <section>
          <h1>Welcome to the Organization Selection page.</h1>
          <p>
            This part of the application requires the user to select an
            organization in order to proceed. If you are not part of an
            organization, you can accept an invitation or create your own
            organization.
          </p>
          <OrganizationList
            hidePersonal={true}
            afterCreateOrganizationUrl={query.redirectUrl ?? "/"}
            afterSelectOrganizationUrl={query.redirectUrl ?? "/"}
          />
        </section>
      )
    }
    ```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

> #### Limit parts of an application to only users with active organizations

Reviewer: There is really limited different between 'whole application' and 'part of an application'

Whole application:
- check in app/layout.tsx
- or check in middleware
```
if(auth.userId && !auth.orgId && req.nextUrl.pathname !== "/org-selection"){
      const searchParams = new URLSearchParams({
        redirectUrl: req.url
      })
 
      const orgSelection = new URL(`/org-selection?${searchParams.toString()}`, req.url);
 
      return NextResponse.redirect(orgSelection)
```

Part of application
- check in app/dashboard/layout.tsx
- or check in middleware
```
if(auth.userId && !auth.orgId && <check if path is /dashboard> && req.nextUrl.pathname !== "/dashboard/org-selection"){
      const searchParams = new URLSearchParams({
        redirectUrl: req.url
      })
 
      const orgSelection = new URL(`/dashboard/org-selection?${searchParams.toString()}`, req.url);
 
      return NextResponse.redirect(orgSelection)
```

The guide could just cover these two options in one 'protect your application' general section.

Author: I've updated the organization to better reflect this information. Let me know what you think!
